interfaces/builtin: add README file (#11681)
snapcore/snapd: interfaces/builtin/README.md

allowed to use, and if a snap is allowed to use a plug/slot, what other
slots/plugs should connect to that plug/slot on this snap.

The behaviour is defined by a map which has 6 possible keys:

- allow-installation
- deny-installation
- allow-connection
- deny-connection
- allow-auto-connection
- deny-auto-connection

Each of these keys can either have a static value of true/false or can be a
more complex object/list which then is “evaluated” by snapd on a device to
determine the actual value, be it true or false.

Note that the declarations defined in the snapd interfaces can be overridden by
“store assertions”, which make it possible for the snap store to alter the
behaviour hardcoded in snapd; for example, a store assertion is typically used
to grant auto-connection to some plugs of a specific application where this is
deemed reasonable or safe (for example, auto-connecting the `camera` interface
in a web-streaming application).

The default value of the `allow-*` keys when not otherwise specified is `true`
and the default value of `deny-*` keys when not otherwise specified is `false`.
Matching `deny-*` constraints override/take precedence over `allow-*`

> constraints.

Author: Is this actually true? That would mean that a `deny-` rule hardcoded in a snapd interface cannot be overruled by the snap store -- which I find unlikely.

# Interfaces static information

## BaseDeclaration{Plugs,Slots}

> The snap-declarations are mainly used to control what plugs or slots a snap is

Reviewer: it's  a bit strange that this mentions snap-declaration but not base declaration which is the thing actually controlled here. We need to expand this to cover a bit more. The base declaration it's snapd base rules and then snap-declaration can be used to override those.

in the base-declaration are said to be “**super-privileged**”, meaning they
cannot be used at all without a snap-declaration assertion.

### allow-connection

The `allow-connection` key is the next key to be evaluated after the snap is
allowed to be installed. This key controls whether a connection is permitted at
all and usually is used to ensure that only “compatible” plugs and slots are
connected to each other. A great example is the content interface, where the
following (abbreviated) rule from the base-declaration is used to ensure that a
candidate plug and slot content interface have matching `content` attribute
values:

    allow-connection:
      plug-attributes:
        content: $SLOT(content)

This can be read as `allow-connection` evaluating to `true` only when the plug
has an attribute `content` with the same value as the attribute `content` in
the slot. That is to say, these plug and slots are compatible because `content`
does match for the plug and slot:

    # in the snap providing the content:
    slots:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: specific-files

    # in the snap consuming the content:
    plugs:
      foo-content:

>         interface: something-else

Author: Oops, indeed! Fixed, thanks for spotting it!

        content: specific-files

While the following plug and slots are not compatible:

    slots:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: other-files

    plugs:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: specific-files

### allow-auto-connection

The allow-auto-connection key is the final key considered when snapd is
evaluating automatic connection of interface plugs and slots. If this key
evaluates to `true`, then this plug/slot combination is considered a valid

> candidate for automatic connection.

Reviewer: ...automatic connection will happen normally only if there is one candidate pairing with a slot for a given plug.

### Supported rules

Each of the keys seen before (`allow/deny-installation`,
`allow/deny-connection`, and `allow/deny-auto-connection`) has a set of
sub-keys that can be used as rules with each constraint. The authoritative
place where this information comes from is inside snapd in the `asserts`
package, specifically the file `ifacedecls.go` is the main place where these
are defined.

In `allow-connection` or `allow-auto-connection` constraints about snap type,
snap ID and publisher can only be specified for the other side snap (e.g. a
slot-side `allow-connection` constraint can only specify plug-snap-type,
plug-snap-id, plug-snap-publisher).

For the `plug-snap-type` and `slot-snap-type` rules there are three possible

> values: `core`, `gadget`, and `app`. The `core` snap type refers to whichever

Reviewer: kernel is also a valid value, we are just not using it yet

  - `Cx4J8ADDq8xULNaAjO7mQid75ru4rObB`, OR
  - `WabnwLoV48BCMj8NoOetmdxFFMxDsPGb`

List and maps can be used also as values for attributes under
plug/slot-attributes constraints. A map will match only if the attribute value
contains all the entries in the constraints map with the same values (extra
attribute elements are ignored).
A list will match against a non-list attribute value if the value matches any
of the list elements. A list will match against a list attribute value if all
the elements in the attribute list value in turn match something in the list.
For example this means a constraint list of value constraints will match a list
of attribute scalars if the two groups of values match as a sets (order doesn't
matter).

#### Special matches and variables

Plug/slot-attributes string value constraints are interpreted as regexps
(wrapped implicitly in `^$` anchors), unless they are one of the special forms
starting with `$`.

The special forms starting with `$` currently consist of:

- `$SLOT_PUBLISHER_ID`, `$PLUG_PUBLISHER_ID`: these are respectively used from
  the plug side and slot side of a declaration to refer to the publisher-id of

>   the other side of the connection.

Reviewer: can only be used in plug/slot-publisher-id contraints

- `$PLUG()`, `$SLOT()`: similar to the above, but used for attributes instead
  of publisher-ids.
- `$MISSING`: matches only when the attribute set to `$MISSING` is not

>   specified in the snap.

Reviewer: these can be used in plug/slot-attributes constraints

allowed to use, and if a snap is allowed to use a plug/slot, what other
slots/plugs can connect to that plug/slot on this snap.

These ruels are declared as a map which has 6 possible keys:

- allow-installation
- deny-installation
- allow-connection
- deny-connection
- allow-auto-connection
- deny-auto-connection

Each of these keys can either have a static value of true/false or can be a
more complex object/list which then is “evaluated” by snapd on a device to
determine the actual value, be it true or false.

### Base declaration and snap declarations

The rules defined in the snapd interfaces source code (via setting
`commonInterface.baseDeclarationSlots/Plugs`) form together the
“base declaration” and can be overridden in by per-snap rules in the
snap store published via the per-snap `snap-declaration` assertions,
which make it possible for a store to alter the policy hardcoded in
snapd; for example, a store assertion is typically used to grant
auto-connection to some plugs of a specific application where this is
deemed reasonable or safe (for example, auto-connecting the `camera`
interface in a web-streaming application).

> ### Basic evalution and precedence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Basic evaluation and precedence
```

This can be read as `allow-connection` evaluating to `true` only when the plug
has an attribute `content` with the same value as the attribute `content` in
the slot. That is to say, these plug and slots are compatible because `content`
does match for the plug and slot:

    # in the snap providing the content:
    slots:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: specific-files

    # in the snap consuming the content:
    plugs:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: specific-files

While the following plug and slots are not compatible:

    slots:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: other-files

    plugs:
      foo-content:
        interface: content
        content: specific-files

### allow-auto-connection

The allow-auto-connection key is the final key considered when snapd is
evaluating the automatic connection of interface plugs and slots. If this key
evaluates to `true`, then this plug/slot combination is considered a valid
candidate for automatic connection. In this context allow-connection is ignored.

An automatic connection will happen normally only if there is one single candidate

> paired with a slot for a given plug.

Reviewer 2: This sounds good to me too - thanks for the suggestion.

> paired with a slot for a given plug.

Author: Sorry, the sentence sounded much better and I didn't notice that the original meeting was lost. :-)

I've now applied Samuele's suggestion.

> pairing with a slot for a given plug.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
paired with a slot for a given plug.
```

### Supported rule constraints

Each of the keys seen before (`allow/deny-installation`,
`allow/deny-connection`, and `allow/deny-auto-connection`) has a set of
sub-keys that can be used as rules with each constraint. The authoritative
place where this information comes from is inside snapd in the `asserts`
package, specifically the file `ifacedecls.go` is the main place where these
are defined.

In `allow-connection` or `allow-auto-connection` constraints about snap type,
snap ID and publisher can only be specified for the other side snap (e.g. a
slot-side `allow-connection` constraint can only specify plug-snap-type,
plug-snap-id, plug-snap-publisher).

For the `plug-snap-type` and `slot-snap-type` rules there are 4

> possible values: `core`, `gadget`, `kernel` and `app`. The `core` snap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possible values: `core`, `gadget`, `kernel`, and `app`. The `core` snap
```

type refers to whichever snap is providing snapd on the system and

> therefore the system inteface slots, either the `core` snap or `snapd`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
therefore the system interface slots, either the `core` snap or `snapd`
```

snap (typically `core` snap on UC16 devices, `snapd` snap on UC18+
systems, and either on classic systems depending on re-exec logic).

The `on-store`, `on-brand`, and `on-model` rules are not generally hardcoded in
the snapd interfaces, but are specified in store assertions; they are known as
“device context constraints” and are primarily used to ensure that a given
rule only applies to a device with a serial assertion (and thus model
assertion) from a given brand. This is because if the assertion and snap from a
brand store were copied to a non-branded device, the assertion could still be

> ack’d by the device and the snap installed, but the assertion would not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
acknowledged by the device and the snap installed, but the assertion would not
```

operate, and snap connections would not take place as they do on the branded
device.

> The `plug-names` and `slot-names` rules are also only used in store assertions;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `plug-names` and `slot-names` rules are also only used in store assertions.
```

> they refer to the naming of a plug or slot when that slot is scoped globally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They refer to the naming of a plug or slot when that slot is scoped globally
```

with a name other than the generic interface name.
For example this assertion:

    plugs:
      gpio:
        allow-auto-connection:
          slot-names: [ gpio1 ]
          plug-names: [ gpio-red-led ]

only allows the plugging snap to have its plug named `gpio-red-led`
auto-connected to a gpio slot named `gpio1`.

### Rule evaluation

#### Greedy connection / single slot rule

The first rule about whether an automatic connection happens between a plug and
a slot has to do with “arity” or how many slots a given plug is being
considered to connect to and vice versa. This is expressed with the
`slots-per-plug` and `plugs-per-slot` rules, with the default value of
`plugs-per-slot` being “`*`” meaning any number of plugs can be connected to a

> specific slot, but the default value of `slots-per-plug` being “`1`” meaning that a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specific slot. The default value of `slots-per-plug` is “`1`”, however, meaning that a
```

plug can in general without a special snap-declaration only automatically
connect to one slot. All that is to say, if there are multiple candidate slots,
in the default case a plug will auto-connect to neither of them and
snapd will issue a warning.

See also [this forum
post](https://forum.snapcraft.io/t/plug-slot-declaration-rules-greedy-plugs/12438)
which was written when this logic was first implemented.

#### Maps and Lists

The next rule about evaluating snap-declaration assertions is that maps are
treated as logical ANDs where each key in the map must individually evaluate to
`true` and lists are treated as logical ORs where only one of the elements of

> the list must evaluate to `true`. So with the following example assertion, in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the list must evaluate to `true`. With the following example assertion,
```

order

> for the the `serial-port` plug in this snap to auto-connect, either the first

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the `serial-port` plug in this snap to auto-connect, either the first
```

element of the list must evaluate to `true` or the second element of the list
must evaluate to `true` (or they could both theoretically evaluate to `true`,
but this is impossible in practice since the slots can only come from gadgets
and so to match both the system would have to have two gadget snaps installed
simultaneously which is impossible).

    plugs:
      serial-port:
        allow-auto-connection:
          -
            on-store:
              - my-app-store
            plug-names:
              - serial-rf-nic
            slot-attributes:
              path: /dev/serial-port-rfnic
            slot-names:
              - serial-rf-nic
            slot-snap-id:
              - Cx4J8ADDq8xULNaAjO7mQid75ru4rObB
          -
            on-store:
              - my-app-store
            plug-names:
              - serial-rf-nic
            slot-attributes:
              path: /dev/serial-port-rfnic
            slot-names:
              - serial-rf-nic
            slot-snap-id:
              - WabnwLoV48BCMj8NoOetmdxFFMxDsPGb

> In order for the first element of the allow-auto-connection list to evaluate to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the first element of the allow-auto-connection list to evaluate to
```

`true`, the following things must be true:

- The device must be on a brand device in `my-app-store` AND
- The plug name must be `serial-rf-nic` AND
- The slot name must be `serial-rf-nic` AND
- The slot must declare an attribute, `path`, with the value
  `/dev/serial-port-rfnic` AND
- The slot must come from a snap with a snap ID of
  `Cx4J8ADDq8xULNaAjO7mQid75ru4rObB`

> And similarly for the second element of the allow-auto-connection list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above is also true for the second element of the allow-auto-connection list.
```

> An equivalent way to write this assertion that works exactly the same would be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An equivalent way to write an assertion that works in exactly the same way would be:
```

    plugs:
      serial-port:
        allow-auto-connection:
          on-store:
            - my-app-store
          plug-names:
            - serial-rf-nic
          slot-attributes:
            path: /dev/serial-port-rfnic
          slot-names:
            - serial-rf-nic
          slot-snap-id:
            - Cx4J8ADDq8xULNaAjO7mQid75ru4rObB
            - WabnwLoV48BCMj8NoOetmdxFFMxDsPGb

The chief difference here is that instead of having a list of two maps, we
instead have a single map, and the key which changes for the two gadgets is the

> `slot-snap-id` which now has two values in a list. In this case the slot snap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`slot-snap-id` which now has two values in a list. In this case, the slot snap
```

ID must be one of the snap IDs in the list in order for the `slot-snap-id` rule
to evaluate to true. So the following things must be true:

- The device must be on a brand device in `my-app-store` AND
- The plug name must be `serial-rf-nic` AND
- The slot-name must be `serial-rf-nic` AND
- The slot must declare an attribute, `path`, with the value
  `/dev/serial-port-rfnic` AND
- The slot must come from a snap with a snap ID of any of the following elements:
  - `Cx4J8ADDq8xULNaAjO7mQid75ru4rObB`, OR
  - `WabnwLoV48BCMj8NoOetmdxFFMxDsPGb`

> List and maps can be used also as values for attributes under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lists and maps can also be used as values for attributes under
```

plug/slot-attributes constraints. A map will match only if the attribute value
contains all the entries in the constraints map with the same values (extra
attribute elements are ignored).
A list will match against a non-list attribute value if the value matches any
of the list elements. A list will match against a list attribute value if all
the elements in the attribute list value in turn match something in the list.

> For example this means a constraint list of value constraints will match a list

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means, for example, a constraint list of value constraints will match a list
```

> of attribute scalars if the two groups of values match as a sets (order doesn't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of attribute scalars if the two groups of values match as a set (order doesn't
```

matter).

#### Attribute constraints and special matches and variables

Plug/slot-attributes string value constraints are interpreted as regexps
(wrapped implicitly in `^$` anchors), unless they are one of the special forms
starting with `$`.

The special forms starting with `$` currently consist of:

- `$SLOT_PUBLISHER_ID`, `$PLUG_PUBLISHER_ID`: these can be specified in the
  `plug-publisher-id` and `slot-publisher-id` constraints respectively and are
  used from the plug side and slot side of a declaration to refer to the
  publisher-id of the other side of the connection.
- `$PLUG()`, `$SLOT()`: similar to the above, but used in the `plug-attributes`
  and `slot-attributes` constraints for specifying attributes instead of
  publisher-ids.
- `$MISSING`: used in the `plug-attributes` and `slot-attributes` constraints
  to match when the attribute set to `$MISSING` is not specified in the snap.

For example, these features are used in the base-declaration for the `content`

> interface to express that connection is only allowed when the attribute value

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interface to express that a connection is only allowed when the attribute value
```
